#alternate
REFRESH(540 sec):
file://localhost/Users/jourdanwilson/Desktop/school/projet_encadre/plur
ital/groupePPE1_2024/aspirations/lang3-12.html
Tehran Times


* Sun January 12, 2025


*
*
*


*
*
*

By Xavier Villar

General Qassem Soleimani: master of soft power in Iran's strategic culture

1. Politics

January 1, 2025 - 22:46

MADRID – In the global competition for influence, soft power has become
a key indicator of national strength. In contrast to direct
confrontations involving hard power, an increasing number of countries
are opting for less costly yet equally effective strategies, using
resources that attract and persuade rather than impose.

Soft power encompasses the abilities that allow states to project their
influence through the promotion of cultural and political values, as
well as through the development of scientific, technological, and, in
some cases, even military resources. This more subtle and strategic
approach turns these tools into an integrated set that drives their
objectives on the international stage.

Following the triumph of the Islamic Revolution, the Islamic Republic
of Iran has consolidated significant political influence in West Asia.
In addition to its vast natural resources and strategic location, the
region has been marked by the intervention of external actors in the
internal affairs of its countries, intensifying tensions and
contributing to the emergence of various crises. This context has
favored Iran's rise as a key player in the reshaping of the regional
balance of power.

The actions of the Quds Force of the Islamic Revolution Guard Corps
(IRGC), led by General Qassem Soleimani, played a central role in the
power dynamics of West Asia, particularly in Iraq and Syria. Between
2003 and 2011, the late Soleimani succeeded in significantly weakening
U.S. influence in Iraq while also focusing on combating terrorism in
the region.

For more than two decades, General Soleimani's methods and principles
were distinguished by his ability to manage regional and international
transformations, thereby consolidating the position of the Islamic
Republic of Iran both regionally and globally. In this context, General
Soleimani's operations were key to the strategic defeats of the United
States in West Asia, which not only strengthened Iran's power but also
eroded U.S. influence in the region, particularly among Arab countries.
Thus, General Soleimani has been recognized as the "architect of the
strategic defeats of the United States in West Asia."

This article focuses on two central questions: What role did General
Soleimani play in strengthening Iran's soft power in the West Asia
region? And, under what strategic principles was his deployment of
power developed?

The concept of soft power was introduced by scholar Joseph Nye in 1990
in an article published in The Atlantic. In his analysis, Nye
emphasized the importance of understanding the different ways in which
power can be exercised, distinguishing between direct power, associated
with an authoritarian style, and indirect power, focused on persuasion.

In the first case, power is exercised through tools such as rewards,
threats, or coercion. In the second, soft power manifests itself
through factors such as the attraction of ideas and beliefs, the
ability to set a political agenda, and the influence of culture,
ideology, and institutions that shape the preferences of other actors.

Nye defines soft power as the ability to attract, which often leads to
the fulfillment of one's own interests. Unlike hard power, which relies
on force, threats, or rewards, soft power enables a country to achieve
its objectives through indirect and persuasive means.

According to Nye's theory, the essence of soft power lies in the
ability to shape the preferences of others, a process that is achieved
in an intangible manner through the promotion of cultural appeal,
values, and political structures. However, soft power is distinct from
influence in its foundation: while influence may rely on hard power and
coercion, soft power is based on the ability to attract and persuade,
always contingent upon consent.

To analyze the impact of Iran's soft power in West Asia, it is
essential to understand the sources of this type of power. With this
understanding of soft power resources in the countries of the region,
it becomes possible to identify the role of General Soleimani in
strengthening the influence of the Islamic Republic of Iran in the
region.

Beliefs and values, which arise from social norms and specific patterns
of historical, social, climatic, political, economic, and cultural
contexts, form the foundation of soft power. This type of power is
based on the ability to influence the preferences and values of others,
utilizing intangible elements such as personal appeal, cultural values,
political institutions, and policies perceived as legitimate and
ethical.

In this context, General Qassem Soleimani was able to leverage these
sources of power to promote the Islamic discourse, thereby
strengthening Iran's position in West Asia. His ability to establish
trust-based relationships was a crucial factor in this process.

Trust, as a fundamental pillar of social capital, plays a crucial role
in soft power. Social trust is defined as the expectations and
commitments socially acquired and validated, which implies a
relationship of trust both between individuals and towards the
organizations and institutions that influence social life. In this
regard, the trust that General Soleimani cultivated in the region, both
among his own forces and with regional forces, enabled the countries of
West Asia to establish a special relationship with the Islamic Republic
of Iran. This created a favorable environment for cooperation and
facilitated the overcoming of common challenges.

Diplomacy, as a key dimension of soft power, has been an essential
component of the United States' international strategies since World
War II, particularly in West Asia. In this context, it has also been
used in what some analysts refer to as the "ideological war." An
example of this is the use of sectarian discourse aimed at generating
divisions between Shiites and Sunnis in the region, as part of a
strategy to influence the political and social dynamics.

The Islamic Republic of Iran's response to the attempt to create
sectarian divisions was to deploy an Islamic and ummatic discourse,
based on the unity of the Muslim community beyond sectarian boundaries.

In this regard, it can be concluded that General Soleimani's success in
the region was not solely due to the use of hard power resources. His
success was the result of a comprehensive approach that combined soft
power to persuade the countries of the region to unite in the fight
against terrorism and imperialism. This approach included the use of
cultural, political, communication, and management tools, which enabled
him to consolidate alliances and strengthen Iran's influence in West
Asia.

From the perspective of the Islamic Republic of Iran, one of the key
factors driving the increase in its soft power in the region is the
nature of its objectives. The central purpose of Iran’s presence in
West Asia, according to the political principles established after the
Islamic Revolution, has been the liberation of peoples from external
aggressors and repressive governments. Iran positions itself as a
defender of sovereignty and self-determination for peoples, supporting
regional governments in the face of aggression, foreign occupation, and
terrorist and extremist threats. This approach has strengthened the
trust relationship with governments in the region, which view Iran as a
strategic ally in the defense of their independence and security.

After the triumph of the Islamic Revolution in 1979 and the creation of
the Islamic Republic, a series of discourses based on the Islamist
vision expressed by the revolutionary leader, Imam Khomeini, began to
mobilize. These discourses have deeply influenced Iran’s foreign policy
and the construction of its identity up to the present day.

In this context, Islamism can be defined as the discourse that seeks to
make Islam the central point in the political and social structures of
Muslim communities. It is crucial to differentiate between Islamism and
Islamization. While Islamism makes Islam an explicit political
reference, Islamization refers to the visibility of Islam in cultural
and religious spaces without necessarily integrating it as a
fundamental language or tool in international relations, public
policies, or decision-making.
This Iranian Islamism has led the country to pursue two fundamental
objectives, considered essential for the consolidation of its soft
power and influence in the region:

1. The unity of Islam under the "ummatic mandate": This objective
involves adhering to the vision of Imam Khomeini, the founder of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, which advocates for rapprochement between
Sunni and Shia Muslims. The idea is to build a common language among
Muslims, promoting understanding and dialogue between the different
branches of Islam, all within the parameters set by this unity. In
technical terms, this concept is known as the "post-madhab vision"
(where madhab means legal school in Arabic), which seeks interaction
based on the shared principles of Islam, overcoming sectarian
divisions.

2. The construction of a just society: This second objective responds
to a fundamental ethical-political aspiration, whose horizon is
unattainable but always present. According to the Iranian conception,
the struggle for justice is a constant duty that must lead Muslims to
confront oppression in its various forms, whether political, economic,
or social.

It can be stated, therefore, that the central axis around which all
Iranian discourse is articulated is the “Islamic, revolutionary, and
anti-Western identity.” From this fundamental principle, the foreign
and defense policy of the Islamic Republic of Iran is understood.
Through this approach, concepts such as independence, resistance,
Islamic unity, and responsibility toward the ummah are intertwined,
shaping Iran’s unique Islamic discourse while distinguishing it from
other international actors. A distinctive principle of Iranian foreign
policy is what is termed responsibility toward the Muslim world, which
views Iran’s actions beyond its borders as an "ideological duty." This
vision also encompasses the anti-Zionist policy and support for Islamic
resistance movements in the region, forming what is known as the "Axis
of Resistance."

This principle is formalized in Article 152 of the Constitution of the
Islamic Republic of Iran (adopted on October 24, 1979), which states:
"The foreign policy of the Islamic Republic of Iran is based on… the
defense of the rights of all Muslims, non-alignment with respect to
hegemonic superpowers, and the maintenance of mutually peaceful
relations with all non-belligerent states."

Another fundamental principle in Iran's strategic culture is its
anti-hegemonic vocation and willingness to resist. Based on the idea
that Islam must prevail and not be dominated by others, Iran believes
that it cannot allow foreign powers to impose their will on its foreign
policy. This anti-imperialist identity is deeply rooted in Iran's
history, which has been marked by repeated attempts by Western powers
to control the country.

Iranian leaders consistently call for countering hegemony and resisting
imperialism, considering it an essential principle of their foreign
behavior. In this context, Leader of the Islamic Revolution Ayatollah
Seyyed Ali Khamenei stated in a speech in August 2007, "We will never
tolerate hegemonic behaviors... and countering the global hegemonic
system and overcoming the equation of oppressors-oppressed is an
inseparable indicator of our diplomacy." This statement underscores
Iran's commitment to an anti-hegemonic stance, which guides its
international strategy.

From the early days of the Islamic Republic, the principles of
counter-hegemony were materialized in the policy of “Neither East Nor
West, Only the Islamic Republic,” which can be considered Iran's
version of non-alignment. At that time, Iranian revolutionary
authorities established three fundamental political goals: (1)
achieving autonomy in the formulation of foreign policy, (2) ending
Iran's dependence on a single ideological bloc, and (3) improving
relations with all states, except Israel and the apartheid regime of
South Africa.

Two fundamental principles within Iran's strategic culture are
self-sufficiency and independence. After the Islamic Revolution, the
pursuit of indigenous capabilities, technology, and
knowledge—particularly with regard to the nuclear fuel cycle—became a
source of national pride. In this way, Iran seeks to reduce its
dependence on foreign powers. Ayatollah Khamenei has emphasized the
causal relationship between scientific progress, self-sufficiency, and
independence. According to the Leader, the sanctions imposed by the
United States and Europe are not only ineffective in changing Iran's
foreign policy, but in fact, they are constructive, as they force the
country to become more self-sufficient.

Finally, it is crucial to understand how the Islamic Republic views the
global management system. Iranian authorities consider the
international system to be unjust and unequal, advocating for a more
just world order. Since the Islamic Revolution, Iran has pursued a
revisionist policy centered on justice and the creation of equitable
international relations, urging countries they deem arrogant to act
more justly.

It can thus be said that the figure of the late Qassem Soleimani, from
the perspective of the Islamic Republic, embodies the revolutionary
principles established after the triumph of 1979. His ability to use
soft power consolidated him as one of the most relevant figures, not
only in Iran but throughout the region. He stood out for his capacity
to influence and build alliances based on shared values and common
objectives, which strengthened Iran's role in both the regional and
international arenas.

Related News

* Soleimani was architect of the model for expanding Iran's
influence:  MP
* Iran's role in the geopolitical shift of West Asia

Tags

* Lieutenant General Qassem Soleimani

*
*

*
*
*

Leave a Comment

Name ____________________
Email ____________________
Your Message
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________


Latest

* Israeli historian: 'There’s no genocide of Ukrainians, but there is
of Palestinians'
* UN’s Albanese says ‘shocked’ but not ‘surprised’ by war on Gaza
* Should Iran move its capital? examining the potential for
relocation
* Persian performance of “Molly Sweeney” to be staged in Dubai
* Los Angeles inferno switches direction, anger rises over fire
response
* Syrian intelligence says it foiled ISIL attempt to blow up Shia
shrine
* Who’s afraid of America first?
* Renowned Iranian composer Fereydoun Shahbazian passes away at 82
* “Yahya's Prophecy” exhibit showcases stories of resilience in war
refugee camps
* The need to prepare for U.S.’s psychological warfare
* IRGC dismantles spy network in SW Iran
* CIA director acknowledges Iran's peaceful nuclear stance
* IRGC unveils new underground missile base used during Operation
True Promise II
* Iran Army launches ‘Eqtedar 1403’ air defense drill

Desktop version Mobile version

Top


*
*
*
*
*


All Content by Mehr News Agency is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License.
