
Fishing

Bass Fishing Best of 2024 List: Soft Plastic Baits - Favorites After a Year
of Testing

I try a lot of bass fishing gear over the course of a year, and I
always end up with a few absolute favorites. It’s been an exceptional
year for new baits. This list highlights the best of the best.

Kurt Mazurek | Dec 30, 2024

A showcase of the best soft plastic baits for bass fishing in 2024:
Jackall DriftFry Mellow, Rapala Freeloader, Berkley Drip Minnow, CPF
Thumper Pro, and Rapala Cleanup Craw.
A showcase of the best soft plastic baits for bass fishing in 2024:
Jackall DriftFry Mellow, Rapala Freeloader, Berkley Drip Minnow, CPF
Thumper Pro, and Rapala Cleanup Craw. / Kurt Mazurek
__________________________________________________________________

Jackall DriftFry

>>> A collection of Jackall DriftFry lures showing off their range of
realistic, bass catching colors. A collection of Jackall DriftFry lures
showing off their range of realistic, bass catching colors.
The Jackall DriftFry's built in lip sets it apart from other soft
plastic bass baits. That lip causes a rocking, twisting, swimming
action bass can't resist. / Jackall

Why it’s Great: In a year with a lot of new contenders in the
hover/strolling, forward facing sonar, minnow imitating soft bait
category, the Jackall DriftFry is truly unique. But, I wouldn’t expect
anything but groundbreaking and original from Jackall. The DriftFry’s
built in lip gives it a rolling, twisting, slow forward moving action
bass love.

My Detailed Review: As soon as you see the Jackall DriftFry, you can’t
help but think that built-in-lip makes perfect sense. And then you see
angler, Kyoya Fujita, dominate the Bassmaster Elite Series at Toledo
Bend with it and you know this is something special. That unique lip
design causes a rocking, twisting, swimming action bass can't resist.
This versatile lure can be used as a trailer for bladed jigs,
spinnerbaits, umbrella rigs, and more, but it was designed for fishing
the mid-strolling technique to target bigger bass. Available in 4” and
5.2” models, with beautiful realistic color options, detailed scales,
and molded gill plates, this lure is going to finesse a lot of bass
into biting.

Rapala Crush City Freeloader

>>> A package of Crush City Freeloader lures with two of the soft
plastic bass lures out of the package in the foreground A package of
Crush City Freeloader lures with two of the soft plastic bass lures out
of the package in the foreground
The Crush City Freeloader was found to work exceptionally well for
mid-strolling techniques, but it was actually designed as a bladed jig
trailer where it works just as well. / Rapala

Why it’s Great: There will be those who question why I’m featuring the
Freeloader over the Mooch Minnow. For me, the Freeloader is the bait I
got to spend all year fishing and fall in love with. It’s just a great,
subtle, versatile, finesse bait. It has become my go-to bladed-jig
trailer.

My Detailed Review: I got to speak with Dan Quinn, who was very
involved in the development of the Crush City Freeloader. He explained,
“We designed it as a trailer for a chatter bait or spinner bait or
things like that. But then this new technique of just rigging it on a
on a jig head has taken the world by storm.”

“One of the cool features about this bait, is having a straight tail.
The straight tail means that it doesn’t keel the bait, so it enhances
the action and the hunting nature of the bait’s movement. If it had a
more traditional tail on it, that would keel it (keep it running in a
predictable, straight path).”
“I can tell you, fish have a really hard time, not biting it,” said
Quinn.
I can tell you, I’ve personally confirmed everything Dan said.

Berkley PowerBait Drip Minnow

>>> Closeup image of a Berkley PowerBait Drip Minnow rigged on a jig
head held by an angler, showing off the unique drip tail Closeup image
of a Berkley PowerBait Drip Minnow rigged on a jig head held by an
angler, showing off the unique drip tail
The Berkley Drip Minnow's unique tail design creates a subtle,
seductive, random movement that triggers bass. / Berkley

Why it’s Great: Designed in Berkley’s legendary lab and rigorously
tested by the sport’s top pros, you know this bait is going to convince
even the most cautious bass to bite. And it’s yet another unique take
on how to make a finesse bait move in a convincing way. You need to see
the action of that tail!

My Detailed Review: The Berkley Drip Minnow’s unique, little blob of a
"drip" tail creates random, subtle movements in response to the rod
shaking, making it perfect for a variety of finesse fishing techniques.
Whether fished on a drop shot, shaken on a jighead for forward facing
sonar fish, or even as a chatter bait trailer, this innovative new soft
bait does its all.
The Drip Minnow is available in 14 ultra-realistic color options to
match any hatch. Available in 3", 4", and 5" sizes

CHECK OUT UNDERWATER FOOTAGE IN THE VIDEO BELOW!

CPF Lures 7” Thumper Pro

>>> The author standing on the edge of a lake with a big largemouth
bass caught on the CPF Lures Thumper Pro The author standing on the
edge of a lake with a big largemouth bass caught on the CPF Lures
Thumper Pro
A new take on the old speed worm, the CPF Lures Thumper is the result
of tons of designing, engineering and testing. The result of fishing it
is shown in this photo. / Kurt Mazurek

Why it’s Great: Simple and effective, are about the best traits you can
ask for in a bass bait. These Thumper Worms are obviously based on an
old, proven favorite design, the speed worm, but all of the specific
detail of this bait have been well sorted. I can tell you, this worm
will fool a lot of fish living in shallow weed flats.

My Detailed Review: The Thumper Pro Magnum Speed Worm from CPF Lures is
a can’t miss. They’re super easy to fish and big bass eat them
everywhere they live. While it looks like a fairly simple worm, CPF
Lures put a ton of designing, engineering and testing into these baits
until they were absolutely perfect. They’re made from a proprietary
blend soft plastic with incredible durability and action, causing the
tail to “thump” both subtly and dramatically at the same time, and
catch bass after bass without tearing.

Rapala Crush City Cleanup Craw

>>> An angler on the water holding a big largemouth bass. The photo is
close up on the Cleanup Craw lure hooked in its lip An angler on the
water holding a big largemouth bass. The photo is close up on the
Cleanup Craw lure hooked in its lip
The Crush City Cleanup Craw's meaty, scooped, claw shape produces a
very consistent, tight-kicking action that just looks better than other
craws. / Rapala

Why it’s Great: As someone who has used a lot of different craw models
over the years, this one really ticks all the boxes for me. And because
I know it’s hard to imagine how a bait actually moves in the water, I
recommend you take a look at the short attached video. The way this
thing looks underwater will definitely catch fishermen and fish.

My Detailed Review: The Crush City Freeloader and Mooch Minnow have
stolen all the bass fishing headlines, but don’t sleep on this amazing
new craw bait design, especially when you’re not scoping fish. Yes,
it’s true…sometimes anglers catch bass they’re not looking at on a
screen.
Like all CrushCity™ baits, the Cleanup Craw™ comes from the mind of
incredibly successful bass pro, Jacob Wheeler. At 3.5 inches long, the
Cleanup Craw™ is the ultimate bass snack. The sort of meaty, scooped,
claw shape provides a very consistent, tight-kicking action. And the
unique, forward-facing legs along the sides of the bait, provide
subtle, secondary action with the slightest movement. Plus, the back
ribs allow the angler to skin hook the point in those ribs, but after a
fish or two, skin hook into the body of the bait to maximize usage,
getting a couple more fish out of every bait.

CHECK THESE OUT NEXT!
Bass Fishing Best of 2024 List: Tech Clothing - Favorites After a Year
of Testing
Berkley PowerBait Drip Minnow: The Ultimate Finesse Bass Fishing Soft
Plastic
>>> I try a lot of bass fishing gear over the course of a year, and I
always end up with a few favorites. Here are the 5 best I try a lot of
bass fishing gear over the course of a year, and I always end up with a
few favorites. Here are the 5 best
Bass Fishing Best of 2024 List: Tech Clothing - Favorites After a Year
of Testing / Kurt Mazurek
>>> The Berkley Drip Minnow in hand, showing Ultra-realistic design
with an anatomically correct core and HD Tru Color finishes. The
Berkley Drip Minnow in hand, showing Ultra-realistic design with an
anatomically correct core and HD Tru Color finishes.
Berkley PowerBait Drip Minnow: The Ultimate Finesse Bass Fishing Soft
Plastic / Berkley
__________________________________________________________________

Published Dec 30, 2024
Kurt Mazurek
KURT MAZUREK

Kurt Mazurek writes about all things fishing and the fishing lifestyle
for Sports Illustrated. He has had a successful career in the fishing
industry, developing marketing and creative content for many of the
sport’s most recognizable brands. He is an enthusiastic bass tournament
competitor, YouTuber, photographer, and is the author of the novel
"Personal Best: fishing and life”
__________________________________________________________________

Home/Gear Reviews
On SI
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Takedown Policy
Terms and Conditions
SI Accessibility Statement

© 2025 ABG-SI LLC - SPORTS ILLUSTRATED IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF
ABG-SI LLC. - All Rights Reserved. The content on this site is for
entertainment and educational purposes only. Betting and gambling
content is intended for individuals 21+ and is based on individual
commentators' opinions and not that of Sports Illustrated or its
affiliates, licensees and related brands. All picks and predictions are
suggestions only and not a guarantee of success or profit. If you or
someone you know has a gambling problem, crisis counseling and referral
services can be accessed by calling 1-800-GAMBLER.
