#Simply Psychology » Feed JSON oEmbed (JSON) oEmbed (XML) alternate
alternate alternate alternate alternate alternate alternate alternate
alternate alternate alternate



Skip to content

Simply Psychology


Simply Psychology
Simply Psychology

Psychology

Soft Determinism In Psychology

By
Riley Hoffman
Updated on
October 10, 2023
Updated on
October 10, 2023

Riley Hoffman

Lab Manager at Yale University

B.A., Psychology, Harvard University

Riley Hoffman is the Lab Manager for the Emotion, Health, and
Psychophysiology Lab at Yale University. She graduated from Harvard
University in May 2023 with a B.A. in Psychology. In the future, Riley
plans to pursue a Ph.D. in Psychology and/or law school. Her research
interests lie at the intersection of psychology, health, and society.
__________________________________________________________________

Learn about our Editorial Process
Reviewed by
Saul McLeod, PhD
&
Olivia Guy-Evans, MSc

Saul McLeod, PhD

Editor-in-Chief for Simply Psychology

BSc (Hons) Psychology, MRes, PhD, University of Manchester

Saul McLeod, PhD., is a qualified psychology teacher with over 18 years
of experience in further and higher education. He has been published in
peer-reviewed journals, including the Journal of Clinical Psychology.
__________________________________________________________________

Learn about our Editorial Process

Olivia Guy-Evans, MSc

Associate Editor for Simply Psychology

BSc (Hons) Psychology, MSc Psychology of Education

Olivia Guy-Evans is a writer and associate editor for Simply
Psychology. She has previously worked in healthcare and educational
sectors.
__________________________________________________________________

Learn about our Editorial Process

On This Page:
Toggle

* Examples of soft determinism
* Arguments in favor of soft determinism
* Arguments against soft determinism

Soft determinism, also known as compatibilism, is the belief that
determinism is compatible with free will and moral responsibility.

In other words, soft determinism states that even though all events in
the world are predetermined by what came before them, it is still
possible for people to have free will and thus be morally responsible
for their actions.

Soft determinism is one branch of determinism. Determinism is the idea
that everything that happens could not have gone otherwise; each event
has a fixed outcome because of everything that led to it.

American psychologist and philosopher William James first used the term
soft determinism in his essay “The Dilemma of Determinism” (James,
1895).

Soft determinism is a branch of determinism that differs from hard
determinism. These branches differ in their views on whether free will
is possible in a deterministic universe. Soft determinists believe that
free will is possible in a deterministic universe, even when everything
is predetermined.

They believe that as long as no external forces force someone to make a
certain choice, the person has made a free choice.

Important Definitions

* Determinism: The philosophy that all events are predetermined, by
the chain of events that came before them.
* Soft determinism/compatibilism: The philosophy that determinism is
compatible with the possibility of free will and moral
responsibility for one’s actions.
* Hard determinism/incompatibilism: The philosophy that determinism
makes it impossible to have free will and moral responsibility for
one’s actions.

Examples of soft determinism

Nagel’s example of the peach or the cake

To explain the idea of determinism, philosopher Thomas Nagel (1987)
uses an example of choosing between selecting a peach or a piece of
chocolate cake out of a cafeteria line.

If you choose the cake and think to yourself, “I could have chosen the
peach instead,” what does that mean, and is it true?

A soft determinist would say that because of some combination of your
genetics, your life experiences, your environmental surroundings, and
other factors, the fact that you chose the cake was inevitable.

The process of you deciding to choose the cake was just the
follow-through of a predetermined conclusion. It is not possible that
you could have chosen the peach instead of the cake.

However, you still acted with free will because there was no external
force compelling you to choose the cake and not the peach; no one was
constraining you or forcing you, and therefore you made the choice
freely.

Another example: To study or to party?

Imagine a Friday night where you have a choice to stay home and study
for a big exam on Monday, or to go to a party with friends, and you end
up choosing to stay home and study.

A soft determinist would say that this choice was predetermined; you
were always destined to choose to study because of some combination of
your genetics, how your parents raised you to value education, your
knowledge that the exam is very important, and your desire to get a
good grade, and so on.

However, even though your choice to study was inevitable, you still
acted with free will because your choice was in line with your desires
and motivations.

Arguments in favor of soft determinism

Soft determinism relies on a certain definition of the concept of
“freedom.” It argues the natural meaning of “freedom” is lack of
restraint or compulsion.

Soft determinists argue that when people think about “free will,” they
are referring to physical and psychological freedom from being forced
to act or constrained into not acting a certain way. They argue that
this definition of “freedom” is most intuitive.

Soft determinists argue that given this intuitive definition of
freedom, free will is possible under determinism because the only
necessary condition for free will is that someone is free from
restraint and compulsion.

Even if all of someone’s personality, desires, and motivation may be
predetermined by nature and nurture, they can still have free will and
make free choices within how they are predisposed to act or think.

One philosopher who argued in favor of soft determinism was Harry
Frankfurt. Frankfurt (1971) argued that people have free will when they
have a certain psychological structure; namely, when their first-order
desires align with their second-order desires.

Frankfurt defines first-order desire as “what you want,” and
second-order desire as “what you want to want.” Someone has free will
if what they want aligns with what they want to want.

For instance, if your first-order desire is to go for a walk, and your
second-order desire is to want to walk, then your first and
second-order desires align, and you are free.

This is how it is possible to be free under determinism: Even though
your first and second-order desires may be pre-determined, you are free
since they align with each other.

Arguments against soft determinism

Critics of soft determinism generally fall into two categories: those
who disagree that determinism is true at all, and those who agree that
determinism is true, but disagree with compatibilism and argue that
determinism is incompatible with free will and moral responsibility
(Strawson, n.d.).

Critics of soft determinism who instead believe in hard determinism
argue that the former does not encompass a complete understanding of
the nature of determinism and free will. They believe that under
determinism, it is impossible to have free will or be morally
responsible for one’s actions.

Hard determinists believe that the soft determinist definition of free
will is not sufficient. They believe that the soft determinist
definition of freedom is contrived and does not get to the true meaning
of freedom. Kant referred to soft determinism as a “wretched
subterfuge…, a petty word-juggerly.”

These hard determinists believe that if all of a person’s thoughts,
desires, and choices are predetermined by factors often out of their
control, then it is impossible to be truly free or morally responsible
for their actions.

Besides the hard determinism, there are two additional major schools of
thought that disagree with soft determinism: libertarianism, and
pessimism.

The libertarianists believe that we have free will, but this is
incompatible with determinism, so determinism must not be true.

On the other hand, the pessimists, or no-freedom theorists, believe
that free will is impossible, whether or not determinism is true.

Psychological research on people’s beliefs about free will

Several researchers have investigated the psychology behind people’s
beliefs about determinism, free will, and moral responsibility.

Nichols and Knobe (2007) investigated how the phrasing of questions
about these issues affects people’s responses. They found that when
they asked people questions about the consequences of determinism in an
abstract sense, people’s answers aligned with hard determinism.

For example, if asked, “If everything in the world was predetermined,
would it be possible to have free will?” participants often said it
wouldn’t be possible. However, when you asked people specific,
emotionally-triggering questions about the consequences of determinism,
their answers became more aligned with soft determinism.

Nahmias (2011) shows that hard determinism is unintuitive for average
people. The author argues that this evidence provides support in the
direction of soft determinism.

The author also provides evidence that when you talk to average people
about determinism, they often confuse it with bypassing, a distinct
psychological phenomenon in which our minds have no say in our bodies’
choices.

References

Frankfurt, H. G. (1971). Freedom of the will and the concept of a
person. The Journal of Philosophy, 68(1), pp. 5-20.

James, W. (1896). The dilemma of determinism. In W. James, The Will to
Believe and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy (pp. 145–183). Longmans,

Nagel, T. (1987). Free will. In T. Nagel, What does it all mean? A very
short introduction to philosophy. Oxford University Press.

Nahmias, E. (2011). Intuitions about free will, determinism, and
bypassing. In Robert Kane (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Free Will:
Second Edition. Oxford University Press.

Nichols, S., & Knobe, J. (2007). Moral responsibility and determinism:
The cognitive science of folk intuition. Noûs, 41(4), pp. 663-685.
Print Friendly, PDF & Email

Saul McLeod, PhD

BSc (Hons) Psychology, MRes, PhD, University of Manchester

Editor-in-Chief for Simply Psychology

Saul McLeod, PhD., is a qualified psychology teacher with over 18 years
of experience in further and higher education. He has been published in
peer-reviewed journals, including the Journal of Clinical Psychology.
__________________________________________________________________


Olivia Guy-Evans, MSc

BSc (Hons) Psychology, MSc Psychology of Education

Associate Editor for Simply Psychology

Olivia Guy-Evans is a writer and associate editor for Simply
Psychology. She has previously worked in healthcare and educational
sectors.

Riley Hoffman

Lab Manager at Yale University

B.A., Psychology, Harvard University

Riley Hoffman is the Lab Manager for the Emotion, Health, and
Psychophysiology Lab at Yale University. She graduated from Harvard
University in May 2023 with a B.A. in Psychology. In the future, Riley
plans to pursue a Ph.D. in Psychology and/or law school. Her research
interests lie at the intersection of psychology, health, and society.

Search

Search
____________________
Print Friendly and PDF


© 2025 Simply Psychology • Built with GeneratePress


Search

Contact

We are committed to engaging with you and taking action based on your
suggestions, complaints, and other feedback.

Simply Scholar Ltd. 20-22 Wenlock Road, London N1 7GU

+447438296273

contact@simplypsychology.org

Categories

Psychology

Self-Care

Relationships

our staff

Saul McLeod

Florence Yeung

Ioanna Stavraki

Haddi Browne

Olivia Guy-Evans

Julia Simkus

Anna Drescher

Karina González

Subscribe

Pinterest

Linkedin

Instagram

Editorial Policy

Contact Us

About Us

Privacy policy

© 2024 Simply Psychology — All rights reserved

h4 { font-weight: bold; } h1 { font-size: 40px; } h5 { font-weight:
bold; } .mv-ad-box * { display: none !important; } .content-unmask
.mv-ad-box { display:none; } #printfriendly { line-height: 1.7; }
#printfriendly #pf-title { font-size: 40px; }
